docs/tutorials/docker-images.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Create Docker images
nav_order: 1
parent: Tutorials
---

## Intro

Docker images are templates for Docker containers. You can create your own image or use an already existing one and build on top of it. To build a docker image, you should write a Dockerfile - a text file with instructions on how to create the image. Once the image is built, a container launched from that image can execute commands. The advantage is that containers are self-conained and isolated enviroments - they can be shared and will work everywhere exactly the same.

In this tutorial, I will create a simple Docker image to highlight the main points. The idea is to make a container that will send a request to a weather forecast service and print out the contents to the terminal.

## Create a Dockerfile 

1. First, I create a directory for my image and add a README file.  
`mkdir weather-forecast && cd weather-forecast`  
`echo "This is a container that prints out a current forecast" > README`

1. I then create a Dockerfile and start writing the instructions.  
`nano Dockerfile`

## Write commands to create the image

1. In the beginning of a Dockerfile, I'm specifying a base image on top of which I want to build my image. In this example, I use a simple Ubuntu image, but one can set any image on Docker Hub. For example, if you need to use FSL in your continer, you can select an image with FSL installed.  
`FROM ubuntu:20.04`

1. Below, I'm updating the Ubuntu repositories and installing `curl` command.  
`RUN apt-get update -y && apt-get install -y curl`  
> Note that every `RUN` command creates a new [layer](https://docs.docker.com/storage/storagedriver/#images-and-layers) in a container. It is preferable to use as little of them as possible. So if you need to install multiple packages, run them all in one line.

1. By default, Docker runs images as root. If that is not possible, create a new user and switch. `useradd` command below creates a new user. `-ms /bin/bahs` switch tells the commans to create a home directory for the user and use `bash` as a default shell. `roman` is the user name of the account. `roman:password` string being forwarded to `chpasswd` comand changes the password for that user. This is not strictly necessary, but sometimes can be useful.  
`RUN useradd -ms /bin/bash roman && echo "roman:password" | chpasswd`

1. Set the default working directory inside the container. This directory exists because I created it with `-m` switch above.  
`WORKDIR /home/roman`

1. Switch to the new user - all commands below this line will execute from that user's account. Can be handy when you set up environment variables.  
`USER roman`

1. Let's say I want to specify my city and the timezone in environment variables. I can access them with `$TZ` or `$CITY` from the container.  
`ENV TZ Europe/Berlin`  
`ENV CITY Munich`

1. Now I want to copy the README file I created in the beginning so it's also available inside the container once it's launched. This command will copy the README file from my current working directory to the current working directory inside the container (the one I specified with the `WORKDIR` command)/  
`COPY ./README .`

1. Finally, I will specify a default command for my image that will be executed when I launch a container. I can overwrite this behaviour later and use another command. I'm using [wttr.in](https://wttr.in/) service here (which is, by the way, the coolest way to check the weather! ⛈). Because I already specified my city before in the `$CITY` environment variable, I can use it here. I will copy the output to a text file so I can access it later with the `tee` command. See the [reference](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#cmd) for details on how to format this.  
`CMD [ "/bin/bash", "-c", "curl --silent wttr.in/$CITY | tee /home/roman/current-weather.txt" ]`

1. Now the Dockerfile is ready! The final file looks like this:  

```
FROM ubuntu:20.04
RUN apt-get update -y && apt-get install -y curl
RUN useradd -ms /bin/bash roman && echo "roman:password" | chpasswd
WORKDIR /home/roman
USER roman
ENV TZ Europe/Berlin
ENV CITY Munich
COPY ./README .
CMD [ "/bin/bash", "-c", "curl --silent wttr.in/$CITY | tee /home/roman/current-weather.txt" ]
```

## Build the image

1. This step will create the image. I can specify the name I want for my new image with the `-t`. Specifying a version of the image is possible after the colon. The dot at the end of the line means that the Dockerfile is located in the current directory.  
`docker build -t valneurolab/weather-report:latest .`

1. See if that worked - the image should appear in the list.  
`docker images | grep weather`


## Launch the container

- Now, I need to use the `docker run` command and type the name of my image. The `--rm` switch makes sure that the container is removed after it has executed its commands. (Otherwise, the container will persist and will be visible with `docker ps -a` with the Exited status)  
`docker run --rm valneurolab/weather-report:latest`

![output-screenshot](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25939378/215902889-86930e58-bdca-4bba-b009-8a5389280fec.png)
A super involved, but (arguably) cool way to check the weather 🙂

-  The container accesses wttr.in and prints the results to the stdout - just what I wanted! Since I specified the default command with `CMD` and my city with `ENV` commands, I don't need to specify the command with `docker run`. However, if I wanted to know the weather in Berlin, I could specify that in a custom command that will overwrite the one I specified in the Dockerfile.  
`docker run --rm valneurolab/weather-report:latest curl --silent wttr.in/Berlin`

-  It is also possible to run a different command altogether. For example, if I wanted to list the contents of the home directory inside the contianer:  
`docker run --rm valneurolab/weather-report:latest ls -lh /home/roman`

-  If you're curious about the contents of the container, you can execute the following command to log into the container. The `-it` switch tells Docker to run this in the interactive mode so we can enter commands and get outputs.  
`docker run --rm -it valneurolab/weather-report:latest bash`


-  Finally, I would like to access the text output that my command in the `CMD` line creates (the `tee` command redirects the output to the stdout and a file). To do that, I need to **mount** a directory on my computer somewhere inside the container. That is possible with the `-v` switch.  
I specify the path in my local computer first and the path inside the container after the colon: `</local/path>:</container/path>`. I also need to give write permissions to my working directory so the container can save the output there: `cd .. && chmod -R 777 weather-report` (we run the container from non-root user roman). After executing this command, you should see the `current-weather.txt` file with the container's outputs.   
`docker run --rm -v /home/tumnic/rbelenya/weather-report:/home/roman valneurolab/weather-report:latest`

## Save/load the image

If I wanted to send my image to someone else or another computer, I could save the image to an archive:  
`docker save valneurolab/weather-report:latest -o weather-report-image.tar.gz`

And my recipient could load it with:  
`docker load -i weather-report-image.tar.gz`

--- 
References:

[1](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/) Description of Dockerfile commands  
[2](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/dockerfile_best-practices/) Dockerfile best practices  
[3](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/run/) Docker run reference - useful to launch containers

Commit message:

add a line to the docker tutorial

docs/tutorials/docker-images.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Create Docker images
nav_order: 1
parent: Tutorials
---

## Intro

Docker images are templates for Docker containers. You can create your own image or use an already existing one and build on top of it. To build a docker image, you should write a Dockerfile - a text file with instructions on how to create the image. Once the image is built, a container launched from that image can execute commands. The advantage is that containers are self-conained and isolated enviroments - they can be shared and will work everywhere exactly the same.

In this tutorial, I will create a simple Docker image to highlight the main points. The idea is to make a container that will send a request to a weather forecast service and print out the contents to the terminal.

## Create a Dockerfile 

1. First, I create a directory for my image and add a README file.  
`mkdir weather-forecast && cd weather-forecast`  
`echo "This is a container that prints out a current forecast" > README`

1. I then create a Dockerfile and start writing the instructions.  
`nano Dockerfile`

## Write commands to create the image

1. In the beginning of a Dockerfile, I'm specifying a base image on top of which I want to build my image. In this example, I use a simple Ubuntu image, but one can set any image on Docker Hub. For example, if you need to use FSL in your continer, you can select an image with FSL installed.  
`FROM ubuntu:20.04`

1. Below, I'm updating the Ubuntu repositories and installing `curl` command.  
`RUN apt-get update -y && apt-get install -y curl`  
> Note that every `RUN` command creates a new [layer](https://docs.docker.com/storage/storagedriver/#images-and-layers) in a container. It is preferable to use as little of them as possible. So if you need to install multiple packages, run them all in one line.

1. By default, Docker runs images as root. If that is not possible, create a new user and switch. `useradd` command below creates a new user. `-ms /bin/bahs` switch tells the commans to create a home directory for the user and use `bash` as a default shell. `roman` is the user name of the account. `roman:password` string being forwarded to `chpasswd` comand changes the password for that user. This is not strictly necessary, but sometimes can be useful.  
`RUN useradd -ms /bin/bash roman && echo "roman:password" | chpasswd`

1. Set the default working directory inside the container. This directory exists because I created it with `-m` switch above.  
`WORKDIR /home/roman`

1. Switch to the new user - all commands below this line will execute from that user's account. Can be handy when you set up environment variables.  
`USER roman`

1. Let's say I want to specify my city and the timezone in environment variables. I can access them with `$TZ` or `$CITY` from the container.  
`ENV TZ Europe/Berlin`  
`ENV CITY Munich`

1. Now I want to copy the README file I created in the beginning so it's also available inside the container once it's launched. This command will copy the README file from my current working directory to the current working directory inside the container (the one I specified with the `WORKDIR` command)/  
`COPY ./README .`

1. Finally, I will specify a default command for my image that will be executed when I launch a container. I can overwrite this behaviour later and use another command. I'm using [wttr.in](https://wttr.in/) service here (which is, by the way, the coolest way to check the weather! ⛈). Because I already specified my city before in the `$CITY` environment variable, I can use it here. I will copy the output to a text file so I can access it later with the `tee` command. See the [reference](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#cmd) for details on how to format this.  
`CMD [ "/bin/bash", "-c", "curl --silent wttr.in/$CITY | tee /home/roman/current-weather.txt" ]`

1. Now the Dockerfile is ready! The final file looks like this:  

```
FROM ubuntu:20.04
RUN apt-get update -y && apt-get install -y curl
RUN useradd -ms /bin/bash roman && echo "roman:password" | chpasswd
WORKDIR /home/roman
USER roman
ENV TZ Europe/Berlin
ENV CITY Munich
COPY ./README .
CMD [ "/bin/bash", "-c", "curl --silent wttr.in/$CITY | tee /home/roman/current-weather.txt" ]
```

## Build the image

1. This step will create the image. I can specify the name I want for my new image with the `-t`. Specifying a version of the image is possible after the colon. The dot at the end of the line means that the Dockerfile is located in the current directory.  
`docker build -t valneurolab/weather-report:latest .`

1. See if that worked - the image should appear in the list.  
`docker images | grep weather`


## Launch the container

- Now, I need to use the `docker run` command and type the name of my image. The `--rm` switch makes sure that the container is removed after it has executed its commands. (Otherwise, the container will persist and will be visible with `docker ps -a` with the Exited status)  
`docker run --rm valneurolab/weather-report:latest`

![output-screenshot](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25939378/215902889-86930e58-bdca-4bba-b009-8a5389280fec.png)
A super involved, but (arguably) cool way to check the weather 🙂

-  The container accesses wttr.in and prints the results to the stdout - just what I wanted! Since I specified the default command with `CMD` and my city with `ENV` commands, I don't need to specify the command with `docker run`. However, if I wanted to know the weather in Berlin, I could specify that in a custom command that will overwrite the one I specified in the Dockerfile.  
`docker run --rm valneurolab/weather-report:latest curl --silent wttr.in/Berlin`

- Or, I can overvrite that `CITY` variable I set in the Dockerfile withe the `-e` switch:  
`docker run --rm -e "CITY=Berlin" valneurolab/weather-report:latest`  

-  It is also possible to run a different command altogether. For example, if I wanted to list the contents of the home directory inside the contianer:  
`docker run --rm valneurolab/weather-report:latest ls -lh /home/roman`

-  If you're curious about the contents of the container, you can execute the following command to log into the container. The `-it` switch tells Docker to run this in the interactive mode so we can enter commands and get outputs.  
`docker run --rm -it valneurolab/weather-report:latest bash`


-  Finally, I would like to access the text output that my command in the `CMD` line creates (the `tee` command redirects the output to the stdout and a file). To do that, I need to **mount** a directory on my computer somewhere inside the container. That is possible with the `-v` switch.  
I specify the path in my local computer first and the path inside the container after the colon: `</local/path>:</container/path>`. I also need to give write permissions to my working directory so the container can save the output there: `cd .. && chmod -R 777 weather-report` (we run the container from non-root user roman). After executing this command, you should see the `current-weather.txt` file with the container's outputs.   
`docker run --rm -v /home/tumnic/rbelenya/weather-report:/home/roman valneurolab/weather-report:latest`

## Save/load the image

If I wanted to send my image to someone else or another computer, I could save the image to an archive:  
`docker save valneurolab/weather-report:latest -o weather-report-image.tar.gz`

And my recipient could load it with:  
`docker load -i weather-report-image.tar.gz`

--- 
References:

[1](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/) Description of Dockerfile commands  
[2](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/dockerfile_best-practices/) Dockerfile best practices  
[3](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/run/) Docker run reference - useful to launch containers
